Proposal to add run bundle subcommand. (#19)
operator-framework/enhancements: enhancements/run-bundle.md

---
title: run-bundle
authors:
  - "@jmrodri"
reviewers:
  - "@joelanford"
  - "@estroz"
  - "@kevinrizza"
  - "@ecordell"
  - "@shawn-hurley"
approvers:
  - "@joelanford"
  - "@estroz"
  - "@ecordell"
  - "@shawn-hurley"
creation-date: 2020-05-07
last-updated: 2020-05-07
status: implementable
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:

---

# Run Bundle

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [X] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [X] Test plan is defined
- [X] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Open Questions

1. We currently check OLM installation status with `operator-sdk olm status`.
   Can we change that to using the discovery API?
   * Based on discussions, using the discovery API is the way to go.

2. How do we handle --mode= flag on registry add

>    * should we ALWAYS default to --mode=semver?

Reviewer: Should this be just "default", or does this mean "do not allow user to configure"?

>      * this has less testing and isnot yet the default. We should stick with

Reviewer 2: I would personally like to suggest that `--mode=semver` should be the default. It isn't mainly for backwards compatibility reasons rather than because it's an in progress feature at this point.

Reviewer 3: What about semver-skippatch? I imagine a some users will want to pick between modes for sdk as well.

Reviewer: Semver is a logical choice, and users can choose semver-skippatch explicitly if they'd like. We will document different mode behavior in relation to `run bundle`.

Author: Based on all our discussions.
* When adding a bundle to an empty index, default to **semver**
* When adding a bundle to a provided index, default to **replaces**
* Should the add mode be configurable on the CLI? **optional flag**; not in an example right now

>         the default.

Reviewer 2: That's not something that the registry or OLM itself supports. I recommend using semver mode if you want to be able to add arbitrary bundles like this.

>         the default.

Reviewer 3: This should probably be configurable in the libraries being called (in fact, I think `permissive` will allow it). There's no technical reason to enforce it, other than that 9/10 times adding an operator that `replaces` something not in a catalog is a mistake.

>         the default.

Reviewer 3: I should clarify - there are lots of valid reasons (especially for the pipeline) to not enforce the `replaces` field, because it allows you to truncate catalogs at a particular point in time and ship smaller diffs.

If we added support for skipping this validation in the opm libraries, the pipeline will have the option to disable it, and therefore sdk should have the option to disable it.

>         the default.

Reviewer 4: So where do we end up on this? The questions I want us to answer are:
1. When adding a bundle to an empty index, what mode should be the default?
2. When adding a bundle to a provided index, what mode should be the default?
3. Should the add mode be configurable on the command line of `run bundle`?

>         the default.

Reviewer 5: 1. default is semver
2. replaces
3. flag to select that is optional not in an example for right now

>         the default.

Author: Based on all our discussions.
* When adding a bundle to an empty index, default to **semver**
* When adding a bundle to a provided index, default to **replaces**
* Should the add mode be configurable on the CLI? **optional flag**; not in an example right now

   * should we have a flag that allows our default mode handling to be overridden?

>      * no

Reviewer 3: What is the reasoning is here? I imagine either:

- you would want to replicate the mode you intend to publish with, so that you can see upgrade behavior
- you don't care about mode at all because `run bundle` always runs without the context of a full index (i.e. always builds an index of one operator). if that's the case we can short circuit the mode discussion because it doesn't make a difference.

Reviewer: The index is potentially not full, since a user can pass an arbitrary index image (or none) to the command.

Reviewer 3: Making sure we're on the same page - this command:

- takes an index
- adds a bundle to it
- runs the bundle that it added to the index

If that's the case, then I think users may care how their bundle is added to the index, right? `opm` doesn't help in this case, because it's not in the `add` loop here.

Reviewer: That is a correct assessment of what the command does.

>I think users may care how their bundle is added to the index

Is this variance a blocker for an MVP?

>opm doesn't help in this case, because it's not in the add loop here

Are `opm registry add` (what is happening internally in `run bundle`) and `opm index add` (what a user can do externally) different enough that `opm` does not help, or are you talking about the internal `opm registry add` invocation not being configurable?

Reviewer 3: > Is this variance a blocker for an MVP?

I don't know that it's a blocker, but it doesn't seem like a huge headache to plumb the configuration through. It's just easy to predict the bug report "bundle run produces different behavior than when my operator is published".

> are you talking about the internal opm registry add invocation not being configurable?

Yes, that's all - this thread is on whether the mode should be configurable. I'm pointing out that `opm` is not an escape hatch for this case, because `opm` won't do the "run bundle" part (i.e. you get to choose between good testing ux provided by `run bundle` or accurate testing via more painful `opm` steps).

Author: Based on discussions at Group F meeting, this is what we ended up with:

2. How do we handle --mode= flag on registry add?
   * When adding a bundle to an empty index, default to **semver**
   * When adding a bundle to a provided index, default to **replaces**
   * Should the add mode be configurable on the CLI? **optional flag**;
     not in an example right now

## Summary

Enhance the Operator SDK `run` command to support the new bundle format.

## Motivation

One of the primary goals of the Operator SDK is to make it easy for operator
developers to run and test their operators with Operator Lifecycle
Manager (OLM). There currently exists a `run --olm` command which supports the
packagemanifest format. In order to add support for the new bundle format, we
are migrating to subcommands on the run command instead of increasing the
number of flags.

### Goals

Provide a command line that works with bundle image format.

### Non-Goals

This design does not cover the replacement of run --olm with run
packagemanifest. The change to `run packagemanifest` is covered by
[OSDK-1126](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSDK-1126).

> 

Author: Add this to the non-goals:

Another non-goal, is that `run bundle` is **NOT** intended to help users build
and manage indexes. It is an opinionated command to help users test simple    
bundle-based execution scenarios with ephemeral indexes. We are intentionally 
**NOT** supporting advanced use cases.

## Proposal

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The Operator SDK currently supports running an operator with OLM using the
`run` command with the `--olm` flag. The existing command only supports the
package manifest format. This enhancement will add a new subcommand, `bundle`,
to the `run` command. This new command, `run bundle`, will support the new
bundle format. More information about the different formats can be found at
the URLs below:

 * Operator bundles: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/blob/master/docs/design/operator-bundle.md
 * Package manifests format: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/tree/v1.5.3/#manifest-format

The idea is to consolidate the run command into different subcommands to make
things easier to understand and eliminate flag bloat.

>  * `run local` - exists today

Author: Changed to:

 * `run --local` - exists today; converting to a subcommand will be covered by [OSDK-1126](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSDK-1126)

 * `run packagemanifest` - covered by [OSDK-1126](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSDK-1126)
 * `run bundle` - covered by this design document

#### Command Line Interface
The new command line will look as follows:

```
operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> [--index-image=] [--namespace=] [--install-mode=(AllNamespace|OwnNamespace|SingleNamespace=)]
```

> * `<bundle-image>` is a positional argument that specifies the bundle image.

Reviewer 3: Is there an option for `build+run` for bundle images? or are those always two separate commands?

Reviewer: Two separate commands. Eventually [`operator-sdk generate bundle`](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/pull/2860) will scaffold the `bundle.Dockerfile`; bundle images will be built with `make bundle-build`.

* `[--index-image=]` is an optional flag that specifies the index image.
  * If `--index-image` is not provided, default to

>     `quay.io/operator-framework/upstream-registry-builder`

Reviewer 2: I had thought that the intention was to move to use the `upstream-opm-builder` for this?

  * If `--index-image` is provided, use the provided value
* `[--namespace=]` is an optional flag that specifies the namespace to install
  the operator. It will default to the `KUBECONFIG` context.

> * `[--install-mode=]` is an optional flag that specifies the

Reviewer 3: The `installModes` are already defined by the bundle. I'm assuming this flag is for determining what OperatorGroup to generate - in that case, all we need is a `--target-namespaces=[]` arg taking the set of namespaces to watch (which matches the terminology in the OperatorGroup)

Reviewer 5: We want someone to select the install mode to test not interface with the operator group I think was the the thinking

Reviewer 3: My point is that flag may be confusing. The flag is called `installMode` and the values are `installMode` values, but it does not set the `installMode` on the operator (it can't, because that is already set in the bundle, and this command doesn't build the bundle).

Reviewer: A user can set `--install-mode=InstallModeType[=nsY]`. If a bundle's CSV supports that mode in `installModes` by comparing type strings, `run bundle` will either create an OperatorGroup in some namespace targeting `nsY`, or use an existing and compatible OperatorGroup.

I see where this can create confusion: a supported mode in `installModes` is only a statement about runtime availability, whereas `--install-mode` mixes in OperatorGroup semantics.

I don't think it makes sense to pollute the CLI with two flags, one for `installMode` and another for namespaces to target/watch. We definitely need the latter, and we want the former so users see a mapping between the way they're testing operator deployment and what their CSV/bundle encodes, even though we could infer mode from passed namespaces.

  [OLM install mode](https://red.ht/2YK0ksD).
  * We support 3 modes:
    * AllNamespaces
    * OwnNamspace
    * SingleNamespace=ns1

>       * NOTE: if ns1 is the same as the operator's namespace, a warning will be

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: updated

        printed
  * When `--install-mode` is not supplied, the default precendence order is:
    * `OperatorGroup`, if it already exists
    * `AllNamespaces`, if the CSV supports it
    * `OwnNamespace`, if the CSV supports it
    * If the CSV does not support either of these, `--install-mode` flag
      will be **required**

#### Assumptions
Like the existing `run` command, we **assume** the following:

 1. OLM is already installed
 1. kube API is available with the permissions to create resources

>  1. kube server can see and pull the provided images (i.e. bundle and index)

Reviewer 3: nit: kubelet

Author: changed kube server to kubelet.

 1. If an index image is provided, we assume that it has:
    * bash, so we can change the entrypoint
    * dependencies required for `opm registry add` so we can inject
       the bundle into the DB

>     * the existing registry DB located at `/database/index.db`

Reviewer 2: Is there a technical reason you can't infer the database path on the image? We have a spec that defines a path label for the index image.

Reviewer 4: There is not. It would require a bit more work in the SDK to use the containerd tooling. We think (correct us if we're wrong) that most users will have built their indexes with OPM tooling that defaults to this location, so this works for an MVP.

We plan to do DB path detection could be done in a follow-up.

Reviewer 2: That seems totally reasonable.

Reviewer 3: Just to surface this again - if we plan to follow labels as a followup, shouldn't that be written here (for now assume static path, in the future use the label?)

Author: Updated non-goals to state the following:

For now we will assume the existing registry DB located at `/database/index.db`.
In a follow-up design we can investigate having the SDK use the labels to       
detect the DB path.

#### Example UX Scenarios

Running the following scenarios results in different results. While not an
exhaustive list, these are some example uses of the `run bundle` command.

* `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image>` would install into the default kube namespace,
creates a cluster-wide `OperatorGroup`.
* `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo` would install into
  namespace `foo`, creates a cluster-wide `OperatorGroup`

> * `operator-sdka run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo --install-mode

Reviewer 2: spelling nit: `operator-sdk`

Author: Fixed

  SingleNamespace=bar` would install into namespace foo, would determine if
  OperatorGroup exists and is sufficient, if not it would error
* `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --install-mode SingleNamespace=bar`

>   would install into the default kube namespace, does the OperatorGroup logic

Reviewer 4: I know you've prefaced that this list is not exhaustive, but since we're planning to have logic that looks at what the operator supports and whether there's an existing OperatorGroup, would it make sense to describe the setup and then say what happens when different invocations are run?

Something like:

> - Given an operator that supports install modes `OwnNamespace` and `SingleNamespace` being installed into a namespace with no existing operator group:
>
>     - `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image>` would install into the namespace configured in the `KUBECONFIG` context and an OperatorGroup would be created, targeting the same install namespace
>     - `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo` would install into the `foo` namespace and an OperatorGroup would be created, targeting the `foo` namespace
>    - `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo --install-mode
  SingleNamespace=bar` would install into namespace `foo`, and an OperatorGroup would be created, targeting the `bar` namespace
>
> - Given an operator that supports AllNamespaces, OwnNamespace, and Single namespace being installed into a namespace with an existing OperatorGroup that targets all namespaces:
>
>     - `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image>` would install into the namespace configured in the `KUBECONFIG` context and the operator would watch all namespaces.
>     - `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo` would install into the `foo` namespace and the operator would watch all namespaces.
>     - `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo --install-mode
  SingleNamespace=bar` would install into namespace `foo`, and the operator would watch the `bar` namespace.

Also, not sure if that last bullet in the second scenario is actually correct. If the `OperatorGroup` targets all namespaces, is it possible for an operator installed in that namespace to be configured to watch just one namespace?

Author: I redid the entire Example UX Scenarios section. I don't want to list out every possible combination. I'm not entirely sure which ones are valid. Here's what I ended up with.
#### Example UX Scenarios

Running the following scenarios results in different results. While not an
exhaustive list, these are some example uses of the `run bundle` command.

* `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image>`
* `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo`
* `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo --install-mode SingleNamespace=bar`
* `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --install-mode SingleNamespace=bar`

It is important to remember that the presence of an OperatorGroup in the 
namespace can affect the how `run bundle` behaves. Let's look at a couple scenarios.

* Given an operator that supports install modes `OwnNamespace` and 
  `SingleNamespace` being installed into a namespace with *no* OperatorGroup.
  The `run bundle` command would behave as follows:
  * `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image>` would install into the default
    namespace configured in the `KUBECONFIG` context. An OperatorGroup would be
    created targeting the same install namespace.
  * `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo --install-mode SingleNamespace=bar`
    would install into namespace `foo`. An OperatorGroup would be created
    targeting the `bar` namespace.
* Given an operator that supports install modes `AllNamespaces`, `OwnNamespace`,
  and `SingleNamespace`, being installed into a namespace with an existing
  OperatorGroup that targets all namespaces:
  * `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image>` would install into the default
    namespace configured in the `KUBECONFIG` context. The operator would watch
    all namespaces.
  * `operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo --install-mode SingleNamespace=bar`
    would install into namespace `foo`. The operator would watch namespace
    `bar`.

As you can see the presence of the OperatorGroup will take precedence. If the 
OperatorGroup does not support a version an error condition will occur. The `run
bundle` command will return with a non-zero exit status and log the errors.

#### Simple Example

Let's take the simplest example from above.

```
operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image>
```

What happens when the above is invoked?

 1. Since `--index-image` was not provided, assign variable `registryImage`
    equal to `quay.io/operator-framework/upstream-registry-builder`
 1. Create pod using `registryImage`, set container command (entrypoint) to:
    ```
    /bin/bash -c ‘ \
      /bin/mkdir -p /database && \
      /bin/opm registry add   -d /database/index.db -b {.BundleImage} && \
      /bin/opm registry serve -d /database/index.db’
    ```
 1. If pod fails, clean it up, and error out with message of unsupported

>     index image

Reviewer 4: We probably need to include the pod logs since other errors are possible (e.g. failing to add the bundle to the registry db).

Author: Captured that in the examples. Also captured possibly keeping failed pods around in the alternatives section:

## Alternatives

There is a potential alternative to handling failed pods. Instead of cleaning up
the failed pod and capturing the logs, we could keep the failed pod around to
allow developers to capture the logs and debug the issue.

A flag, --skip-cleanup, could be added to skip cleaning up failed pods. This is
similar to scorecard.

 1. Create GRPC CatalogSource, pointing to <pod-name>.<namespace>:50051
 1. Create OperatorGroup, only if it does not exist, since `--install-mode` was

>     not supplied, defaults to `AllNamespaces`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    not supplied, defaults to `AllNamespaces` (assuming operator supports this mode).
```

Author: captured in proposal now.

 1. Create Subscription
 1. Operator installed into the default namespace defined by KUBECONFIG
 1. Verify operator is installed.

>  1. Exit with success (leaving operator running)

Reviewer 2: nit: this numbered list has every entry start with 1.

Author: Markdown displays it correctly. It prevents you from having to renumber when reordering.

>  1. Exit with success (leaving operator running)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 1. Log decision matrix and final state (e.g. operator is running in namespace X, watching namespace(s) Y.
 1. Log command to execute to cleanup operator.
 1. Exit with success (leaving operator running)
```

#### Complex Example

Now let's look at one of the more complex examples:

```
operator-sdk run bundle <bundle-image> --namespace foo --install-mode SingleNamespace=bar
```

 1. Since `--index-image` was not provided, assign variable `registryImage`
    equal to `quay.io/operator-framework/upstream-opm-builder`
 1. Create pod using `registryImage`, set container command (entrypoint) to:
    ```
    /bin/bash -c ‘ \
      /bin/mkdir -p /database && \
      /bin/opm registry add   -d /database/index.db -b {.BundleImage} && \
      /bin/opm registry serve -d /database/index.db’
    ```
 1. If pod fails, clean it up, and error out with message of unsupported
    index image
 1. Create GRPC CatalogSource, pointing to <pod-name>.<namespace>:50051

>  1. Creates a `SingleNamespace` OperatorGroup watching namespace `bar`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. Creates an OperatorGroup in and targetting namespace `bar`.
```

Author: Done

 1. Exit with success (leaving operator running)

#### Prototype Links

 * PR upstream-opm-builder.Dockerfile: add bash and ca-certificates
   https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/pull/320
 * Examples setup script:
   https://gist.github.com/joelanford/f7a7d89977638547b410db3eafc35a62
 * Modified upstream-opm-builder:
   https://github.com/joelanford/operator-registry/blob/9f8b6b19709a333ede683b89ac0fda1abf9b14b8/upstream-opm-builder.Dockerfile#L16-L17
 * Bundle runner Helm chart:
   https://github.com/joelanford/bundle-runner
 * Static validation sync:
   https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Lf9foKtObj1ACk67a_0BNn7rupWAHEejZ6vynJggBCw/edit#
 * Bundle format:
   https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/blob/master/docs/design/operator-bundle.md

### Risks and Mitigations

If we do not get the modified
[upstream-opm-builder](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/blob/master/docs/design/operator-bundle.md)
referenced above the following assumptions will not work:

  1. if image doesn't have bash, we can't modify the entrypoint
  1. if opm is building index images without bash, then there will be no index

>      images we support

Reviewer 2: If we want to support redhat supported indexes, we should also check to see what their base image is. I know they are definitely doing some replacement there. @gallettilance

## Design Details

### Test Plan

  * add tests for `internal/olm/operator/operator.go`
  * investigate adding e2e tests for `run bundle`, there are currently no e2e

>     tests for `run --olm`

Reviewer 4: There are: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/test/integration/operator_olm_test.go
